
12 The New Nation
The Heroic Days
In January of 1980, The World Bnak published an exhaustive study of the Chilean economy covering the first five years of military rule. The study was done by a fourteen0memeber team of expers of different specialties, bolstered later by written contributions by five other experts, and refined through subsequent research and discussions with Chilean government figures. The first of the summary observations of the report bears repeating: 
Under extraordinarily unfavorable circumstances the Chilean authorities have engineered an economic turnaround without precedent in the history of Chile. When the military took power in September 1973, inflation had reached an annualized rate of around 1,000 precent, net international reserves were negative, the foreign debt in the arrears, and production was declining for the second consecutive year. The deficit of the central government alone exceeded 20 percent of the GDP, the money supply was out of control, the financial system in shambles, and the exchange rate grossly overvalued…1
The man called upon to pick up the pieces of the shattered economy recalled: “Things have gotten so bad that we were importing potatoes from Poland and pork from China- but you couldn’t find those on shop shelves, either.”2 
As the authors of that World Bank study noted, “few economies in the world have been as much studied, argued over, and prescribed for. Chile has continuously been at the center of international adebates reagarding the causes and effects of inflation; the proper role of government in promoting development; the dependency of developing on developed economies; instability arising from reliance on a single export commodity; and implications for economic growth of democratic decision-making, welfare programs, agrarian reform, foreign investment, and import-substitution industrialization.”3
	This is not the placed of the fan the flames of that debate, nor to argue the merits of market versus statist economies. It is, however, the place to point out that most academic and journalistic critiques flow from premises clearly prejudiced in the direction of a larger rather than a smaller role for the state as ana engine of progress and social justice. Those critiques are the ones, then, which largely influence the perceptions and behaviors of government policy-makers, becoming, in turn the fodder of further journalistic/academic discernments. A corollary of that, running through so much of the serious scholarship and more ephemeral media reportage on Chile, is the presumption that policies that seek to stimulate business growth and development are, ipso facto, designed to favor the “rich”  at the expense of the poor. One widely respected American reporter managed to get through an entire, lengthy “analysis of the 1975 crash without once mentioning external factors, but did manage to echo (wrongly) the prevailing orthodoxy: “The minority rich,” he wrote, “are best off now by government intention and the gap between them and everybody else is growing.”4
	Chile is not, and has not been, however, and easy subject for analysis. Quoting, again, from the World Bank study:
Chile is an economically underdeveloped country as the term is normally understood. Among its identifying characteristics are a heavy dependence on a single primary export commodity, low productivity in agriculture, a high rate of infant mortality, high chronic unemployment and under-employment, and significant absolute poverty. In contrast, however, its per capita income, extensive manufacturing sector, and high degree of urbanization rank Chile among what has come to be treated as a middle tier of nations, while its moderate population growth, early introduction of social security and other public welfare programs, and the literacy and sophistication of its people place it close to the ranks of developed countries. To complicate the image further, although prosperous in comparison to the subject countries of most World Bank reports, Chile’s relative position has eroded steadily for the past several decades. While development began to accelerate in many Latin American and Asian countries, Chile experienced slow growth, extreme price instability, and recurrent balance of payment crises…
During the 19th century, Chile was one of the leading economies of South America. Its markets and people were open to both trade and ideas; and Chilean statesmen and institutions had a great influence throughout Latin America…
In the four decades that followed the Great Depression, successive governments accepted increasing responsibility for promoting economic development and achieving a more equitable distribution of its fruits… The results of the effort, as evidenced by economic performance over most of this period, did not match the intent. Because of failures in execution or design, the increasingly large and complex governmental machinery required to administer these policies was often diverted to the serviceof private individual or group interests. Policies invoked to accomplish one end-e.g., hold down the cost of living of urban workers- frequently conflicted with other objective-e.g., increased domestic food production and external payments viability- and a new set of taxes, subsidies or controls and/or a new public agency would have to be added to repair the damage. Support of these activities required a substantial shift of resources from the private to the public sector. Given the political inability to cover all the costs via taxation and the weakness of the domestic capital market, the transfer was accomplished via inflation and foreign borrowing …”5
	The military government did not create “the high chronic unemployment and under-employment,” nor the “significant absolute poverty” nor the myriad of other problems cited in the preceding recital- though you would rarely know this from a reading of press or even scholarly accounts of the period. But this was the statist mold, forty years in forming, that Augusto Pinochet and his associates set out to break. He brought to the task a profound conviction: 
	“Without incurring in determinst excesses,” he said, “we can point that in the inter-relationship between the economic and the social and political orders, economic freedom is a necessary requisite for the existence of a truly free political system.”6
	To break that mold meant breaking forty years of deeply ingrained psychic and social as well as economic deformities. Ordinary citizens- from farmers to bankers and businessmen, from students to house-wives, churchmen to union leaders, and even sportsmen- had coe to look to the state as Big Brother, the arbiter, the catalyst, the court of last resort for all problems. It meant overcoming the resistance of a bloated and entrenched bureaucracy, not only opposed ideologically to the radical ideas of a market economy but (understandably) fearful of the menace the new strategies of a diminished state apparatus posed to their own power, their very jobs. It meant restoring the rationality of the market to prices, and that inevitably meant sharp price increases, some of them shockingly so. To break the mold meant, too, ending import substitution strategies that, in effect, built a high tariff wall around the Chilean economy. Those strategies had created not only business fortunes, but tens of thousands of jobs in industries that were inefficient, expensive. A 1969 study revealed some of the implications of these policies for consumers- and insutrialists:

Table41
Chile: Price comparisons, selected metal-mechanical products (First Semester, 1969) (US Dollars)

Clearly, tearing down those walls, bringing Chile fully into the world economy, was risky. And it was bound to be painful. There could be but one justification: that the Chile that would emerge would be better than the mess the country was in when the revolution began.
	Chileans, by the thousands, began to bet that it would be better from the earliest days. Just as thousands fled or were forced to leave the country, so, too, did many voluntary exiles return: an estimated twenty thousand in those first few years. The World Bank study indicates that in 1975, more than $12 million of foreign exchange was sold to the Central Bank by private individuals, “indicating substantial capital repatriation.” Upper-class Chileans showed their confidence in yet another way in the early months of excruciating crisis, when the government’s vaults were very nearly empty: in the first six months, the Central Bank reported receiving 46,331 units of jewelry, works of art, watches, gold and silver coins- citizen donations to the work of rebuilding the shattered country.7
	Economies are, of course, more than a matter of growth rates. But pending closer inspection of key elements in the socio-economic picture in succeeding sections, growth rates are a valid point of departure. As the following table demonstrates, once the hemorrhage was brought under control, Pinochet’s “Chicago Boys” created a more robust economic corpus for Chile than had any of the three preceding regimes. (The table takes into account only the last four years of Alessandri, and the period up until the 198w crash, which will be examined in a later section)

Table 42
CHILE vs. LATIN AMERICA: AVERAGE ANNUAL GROWTH RATSE, GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT, (1961-1981)

Admiral Jose Toribio Merino Castro, the man in overall command of the economy during those first days, brought to his awesome task the discipline, dedication, and relentlessness he would bring to a major military campaign. For months after the September revolution, he and every other top naval officer involved with economic affairs virtually barricaded themselves in Santiago at what came to be called “the house of the admirals.” “We visited our families Saturday and Sundays- visited, that is, when the workload allowed it. Otherwise, every night after work, we dined together and then went on well into the night, discussing the problems of the various ministries of under our responsibility, adding the process hours and hours of fruitful labor and coordination. It was, “said the commander-in-chief of Chile’s navy, “the longest ‘cruise’ of my life.”8 
	The times called for steady nerves and strong medicine. They called those “the heroic days.”
Merino also brought to the task “The Brick.” This was the name the authors gave to their blueprint for a new Chilean economy. Since August of 1972, ten, mainly young, economists had been striving, under the overall “command” of the retired admiral, Roberto Kelly, to prepare for the day, if ever it would come, to rebuild their dividend and disintegrating country. Finally, in May of 1973, with work on the plan snarled, Kelly summoned the group to the Hotel San Martin in VIna del Mar. There, they smoothed over their differences, and Emilio Sanfuentes Vergara was assigned the job of producing a five-page summary. Among that original core group of ten were a number who would occupy cabinet posts in the new administration. Besides Kelly- who himself would hold two ministerial posts-the “elder statesman” among them was Sergio de Castro, in one sense the original “Chicago Boy” in Chile. De Castro was then forty-three; none of the others was older than thirty-eight. All, in one fashion or another, would go on to play key roles in the future of their country; de Castro, for example would go on to serve from 1975 to 1982 in the Cabinet, first as economy minister, then as finance minister. The others: Alvaro Bardon Munoz, later President of the Central Bank; Manuel Cruzat Infante, founder of one of the most dynamic financial conglomerates in Chilean history; Juan Braun, who became one of his top executives; Pablo Baraona Urzua, also a Central Bank president and economy minister; Andres Sanfuentes Vergara, academic, and his brother, Emilio, a business executive (and protégé of both Baraona and de Castro, “rescued” from his career as a sociologist and sent to study economics at Chicago); Sergio Undurraga Saavedra, who would run the State Development Corporation office in New York; Juan Villarzu Rohde, later the budget director; Jose Luis Zabala Ponce, director of research for the Cetnral Bank. On September 11, the day of revolution, the photocopying machines of El Mercurio worked overtime to churn out numbered copies of the 187-page document, Politicas de Desarrollo (cited in the preceding chapter).
On September 14, a navy car pulled up at de Castro’s house on Oxford Street in Santiago to inform him that Admiral Merino wanted to see him-pronto. Arriving, he was escorted to the fifth floor by a guard pointing a submachine gun at his gut. Merino, totally unknown to him, burst in, informed him that he had been named to advise the new economy minister, General Rolando Gonzalez Acevedo, and left as abruptly as he had come. Shortly afterwards, the minister appeared. He had “The Brick” under his arm. The next day, they went to work.9
“Be brief-We’re Three Years Behind.” That sign was everywhere to be seen in government offices Spartan to the point of shabbiness during those early, intense days of free market revolution. Differences- and there were strong ones –were mainly muted in the spirit of camaraderie so common to acute crisis.10 The economic team of free-marketers assembled by Merino quickly agreed on goals. There was never any doubt as to the first priority: tame inflation. Emilio Sanfuentes, one of the key Chicago boys, would in fact, describe inflation as the “number one, number two, and number three priority.”11
Subsituting the market for the state in the economy meant high priority for monetary policy, traditionally given short shrift when not ignored altogether in Chile. That meant declaring war on the practice of using printing press money to cover mostly governments deficits, but also on the Byzantine credit needs of the private sector. (Despite a number of tough measures and false starts, the reime was unable to slow growth in the money supply during the early years.) It meant, also, creating rational exchange rates and rules, and in this, they mostly succeeded- though also with a few false starts. As to goals, Merino blocked out three large ones: 
(1)	Exploit the country’s farm, timber, mineral, and off-shore resources as never before. The result would be to develop a broad-based export economy, ending the tyranny of dependence on a single export commodity subject to the whims of foreign demand and pricing practices.
(2)	
